It Is Up to You to Have Faith
Part 1
Hail, O mankind! I AM Michael, Prince of the Archangels,
and I come to you this night in memory of the solemn and
beautiful perfection of the faith.
Your faith is your security. And born out of your faith
there descends to this planetary body that infinite spark of the
cosmic fire which holds within it the cosmic regenerative seed
that shall bring about the fruition of universal purpose upon
this planetary body.
How wonderful to behold the fruit of God-endeavor! How
wonderful to behold the fruit of faith! What a mountain of
strength this is to the individual, and how beautifully does this
distribute the strands of perfection throughout the cosmos.
Ladies and gentlemen, in this hour of universal reality, in
this dream which God has created that you call your life, rec-
ognize the need to keep the faith and thus make your life
sublime in that design which God himself envisioned and
which is held locked within the seed of perfection within your
soul. How beautiful, then, is the faith and how beautiful is the
keeping thereof.
I am aware, even now, of moments of loneliness, moments


Copyright © 2011 Summit Publications, Inc.
Vol. 54 No. 3 Beloved Archangel Michael February 1, 2011
®
22
hearts, within the divine seed, there is an equal manifestation
of perfection.

Faith Has the Power of Multiplication

Will you also consider that through this drop in potential,
we are able to radiate and create those magnificent wave forms
which convey faith to you as though it were literally shower-
ing upon your life in cosmic buckets?

Do you understand the meaning of a cosmic bucket? Well,
it is borrowed from your own thoughts and your own words.
For you yourselves recognize how fire brigades often pass a
bucket of water from one hand to another. So do we at cosmic
levels call upon divine energy to create itself in increments
and then descend.

There is a reason for this and we want you to know that
reason. It is because you require faith at every moment and
because if we showered all of the faith that we could muster
at one particular moment, it would literally engulf you. It
would literally knock you down off your feet. You would be
unable to bear it, and I assure you of this. Thus we give it in
increments. And through the seeds of faith, the beautiful
mustard seed of faith grows to become a mustard tree in
which the birds of the air may indeed nest.2
Will you understand this? Will you recognize that faith has
the power of multiplication, that it can be a tiny mustard seed
and then be an oak tree?

Mankind have the tendency, actually, in their thought and
feeling world, to limit the power of God, as though it could
not increase more. Dear hearts, it is not that God could not
give you more. It is simply that your requirement is not always
all of God. And so when he portions to you a blessed portion
of himself, it is a breaking of the bread of heaven.
But that bread which is given to you, that bread which is
It Is Up to You to Have Faith 24

in producing that faith which men desire to wear—in the
sense that a part of the endeavor was mankind’s—then don’t
you think, if you have doubts and insist on holding those
doubts, that a mere archangel might also be unable to erase
them unless, by your free will, you would let me in to occupy
your mind momentarily and your heart and your feeling world?
For then, as I came in to that secret chamber of the heart,
I would carry with me that communion flame. I would carry
with me that perfection as a real regeneration that is within my
heart permanently. And I would give you energy. I would give
you faith. I would give you strength. For this is that which I AM.
A Two-Way Street in Your Divine Relationships
Do you understand the magnificence of actually being
faith yourself? Do you understand what it means to hold the
faith within your heart in the face of every outer condition?
Do you realize and recognize that there is a two-way street, as
some of you call it, in your divine relationships?
It is not enough to totally depend upon us and then deny
the seed of God-intent within yourself. For as you create that
necessary polarity within the forcefield of your heart, lo, it will
make our ingress so much easier. We can come in and we can
sup with you and we can release our power simply because you
will it so. For God and all of us already will it so.
Do you understand, then, that as heaven wills it so, it but
remains for embodied humanity to also will it so? Then
there is a meeting of these twain polarities—our radiation,
representing a positive power of absolute Good, and your
radiation, being a lesser potential of the same manifestation
yet bearing the negative connotation simply because it is a
lesser quantity of the holy perfection of God. Do not be dis-
mayed, beloved hearts of light, simply because you have a
lesser potential in manifestation. After all, within your own
Vol. 54 No. 3 Archangel Michael23
be denied the lesser simply by reason of it not having fulfilled
its experience range within one specific idea.
If you will understand this, if you will take this into con-
sideration, you will not have difficulty with those experiences
that are separating in their ramifications. You will seek toward
greater unity, not necessarily a unity of ideas but a unity of
spiritual experience. For you will combine your experiences
into that sweet experience of living with God. When, then,
this comes about and you summon the fullness of your faith
into manifestation, you will be able to climb up that cosmic
ladder of light and understanding as easily as men and
women get out of bed.
Adhere to the Truth within You
and You Will Have No Need to Fear
I want you to understand that today humanity are in a
distraught state from time to time where world conditions
penetrate their hearts and minds and cause them gross dis-
turbances. I am an archangel. I have long ago escaped from
the range of these pursuits, but I do have the understanding
of the trembling and tremors that pass through mortal con-
sciousness. Men are afraid; they know not why. And they
often fear, most of all, their aloneness, their separation, the
question as to whether or not they are pleasing unto others.
We want you to understand that if you please your own
universal Presence, you need not fear what men shall do unto
you, what they shall think of you or how they shall inter your
bones. I want you to understand they can never touch that
glorious Spirit-spark that is the cosmic fire within you. Put all
of your attention upon that and take your attention away from
the outer facets of human personality and you will solve the
bulk of your problems. If you persist in involving yourself in
the rhythms of human personality, you may well find that dire
It Is Up to You to Have Faith 26
Copyright © 2011 Summit Publications, Inc.
dispensed to you, is the sacred fire. It is the Christ Eucharist.
And when you receive it, it possesses the magnificent power
of pulling together in your consciousness all things until all
things come into a beautiful perspective of awareness.
Seek Toward Greater Unity
Individuals at a particular city within the United States or
the Soviet Union or Israel or France or the islands of the sea
(it matters not where) have a desire to be attuned with God.
So he is there, and there is a connecting strand. Then there
is also a connecting strand through that connecting strand
with our heart and all of the hosts of heaven. Will you under-
stand, then, that we are literally pulling for you—pulling you
together, trying to draw you into a unity of the faith whereby
you will not be divided by every wind of doctrine?
There is no question that over the years certain individ-
uals have acquired a momentum on certain spiritual ideas.
When they have this momentum and they have this concept,
beloved ones, it may be very dear to them, for it was acquired
through many years of experience. It does not have to be right.
Will you understand, then, that because individuals hold
to that which they call the truth of themselves, they often find
that that truth may differ from one individual, from one
monadic expression, to another. When this occurs, it need not
be the means of propelling you to a separation. For after all,
the same God created you, and created you in love.
The journey through the way, the truth and the life is a
journey of acquiring greater discrimination, greater awareness,
greater understanding. When you all have that awareness,
when you all have that understanding, when you are able to
summon that perfection, of course it will remove imperfec-
tion. For the greater always contains the lesser, but the lesser
does not always contain that specific of the greater, which may
Vol. 54 No. 3 Archangel Michael25
of God, the more men will desire to do the will of God,
the more the will of God will come to be almost a gift of rote
unto them? And they will find in due course of time that that
rote will be accelerated by the most marvelous release from
the heart of God of cosmic energy, the energy of joy! And
the joy that Saint Germain referred to as the motor of life3
will become the means of a greater accomplishment in the
life of all.
Will you, then, understand this law and try to live it? Strive
toward understanding. It is not difficult. For when men really,
truly mean to understand, they will not, then, be so quick to
criticize others and to turn toward others, recognizing that all
criticism of others in this world is always, ultimately, a criticism
of their own selves. For human propensities gather momen-
tums and these momentums multiply. And after a while, vast
continents of individuals are pulled to the right or the left
simply by the accumulation of man’s energies.
If individuals would understand that they can call upon
heaven and find that heaven will respond, that the full range
of those energies will come to their power, to their hand, at
the supreme moment that they may need it, they will then be
able to overcome many things that they could not overcome
of themselves.
to be continued
“The Summit Lighthouse Sheds Its Radiance o’er All the World to Manifest as Pearls of Wisdom.”
This previously unpublished dictation by Archangel Michael was deliv-
ered by the Messenger of the Great White Brotherhood Mark L. Prophet
on Sunday, October 15, 1972, during the Class of the Harvest Sun, held
in Colorado Springs, Colorado. Part 2 is published in Pearls of Wisdom,
vol. 54, no. 4, where the notes are also continued.
It Is Up to You to Have Faith 28
Copyright © 2011 Summit Publications, Inc. All rights reserved. Published by The Summit Lighthouse,
63 Summit Way, Gardiner, MT 59030-9314. Tel: 406-848-9500. www.TSL.org
experiences will come to you from time to time, and you will
cry out, “O God, help me.”
Let me say unto you that the hosts of heaven are more
ready to help you than you dare to imagine. I assure you that
there are some of you in this room who say with your lips that
you desire God to help you. But in reality it is a basic insecu-
rity in your own mind that causes you to say this, for it comes
from a certain amount of hypocrisy. You are not always con-
vinced of the fact that God is real. There are doubts and ques-
tionings within your mind and the range of that outer mind.
O beloved hearts, will you not let go of that feeling? Will
you not replace it by a feeling of faith and understanding?
If you will, I can promise you, then, that not only tonight but
throughout the span of your life, when you call upon me and
ask my assistance, that assistance will come forth—providing
you have made a reasonable conformation to those cosmic
ideas which the Godhead has released in cosmic hieroglyph
first and then later into those writings which men refer to as
the sacred bonds of the sacred Word.
I want you to understand that the Word is already written
within you. If you would adhere to that truth which is within
you, you would have no need to fear whatsoever.
Fear and doubt come from within mankind and the range
of his mortal experiences. He has suffered various calamities
throughout the range of those experiences. He has often
come into realms and areas of doubt. And in those moments,
because he doubted, he did not receive the necessary help
from heaven that he should have had. And therefore, his
doubt was reinforced.
The Law of Doing the Will of God
Don’t individuals understand this simple law—that the
more men do the will of God, the more men will do the will
Vol. 54 No. 3 Archangel Michael27